.TH Z80-MEMORY 3 "01 Oct 2006" "Z80-MEMORY Version 2.4" "Memory access"

.SH NAME
init_banks(\|), reset_banks(\|), bank_port(\|), switch_bank(\|),
clear_memory(\|), memory_at(\|), read_addr(\|), read_memo(\|), write_memo(\|),
write_to_memory(\!), dma_write(\|), dma_read(\|) \- total memory access
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "#include <stdio.h>"
.sp 2
.BI "int init_banks(char *rom_path, char *bank_mapping_descr);"
.sp
.BI "void reset_banks(void);"
.sp
.BI "unsigned  bank_port(unsigned char id);"
.sp
.BI "void switch_bank(unsigned char id, unsigned i);"
.sp
.BI "void clear_memory(void);"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char memory_at(unsigned short index);"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char * io_address;"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char read_addr(unsigned short index);"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char read_memo(unsigned short index);"
.sp
.BI "void write_memo(unsigned short index, unsigned char data);"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char write_to_memory(unsigend short index, unsigned char data);"
.sp
.BI "unsigned  dma_write(unsigned short offset, unsigned count, FILE *from);"
.sp
.BI "unsigned  dma_read(unsigned short offset, unsigned count, FILE *to);"

.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions provide all memory access and also read data from external hardware.
.TP
.I init_banks
initializes the bank handling and reads the bank contents from the directory
.I *rom_path
with the file
.I *bank_mapping_descr
containing the bank mapping description. It returns the number of usable bank entries in the description file.
.TP
.I reset_banks
does a reset to the banks meaning going to the default initialization.
.TP
.I bank_port
can be used to test a port whether it is reserved for bank switching.
If this is the case it returns the positive bank port no else 0.
.TP
.I switch_bank
switches the bank 
.I id
into memory at the position defined by bank port no
.I i.
.TP
.I clear_memory
sets these parts of the 64kB RAM to 0 which are writeable.
.TP
.I memory_at 
returns the byte value at position 
.I index
in the memory. Can not be used by the decoding or execution unit of
the CPU because it by-passes the CPU.
.TP
.I io_address
holds the location of an external supplied byte by the hardware.
.TP
.I read_addr
returns the byte value correspoing to the address
.I index.
This may be an IO-address in which case 
.I io_address 
is just to locate the byte.
.TP
.I read_memo
returns the byte value correspoing to the address 
.I index
from memory.
.TP
.I write_memo
writes the byte value
.I data
into memory at address 
.I index
provided this address is writeable.
.TP
.I write_to_memory
writes the byte value
.I data
to address
.I index
provided this address is writeable. It returns the previous value at the
address. This function can not be used by the execution unit because it
by-passes the CPU. It is demanded from
.I compile(void)
which is called from
.I z80-mon.
.TP
.I dma_write
transfers into memory starting at address
.I offset
.I count
many bytes directly from file
.I from
by passing the CPU.
.TP
.I dma_read
transfers from memory address
.I offset
.I count
many bytes directly into file
.I to
by passing the CPU.
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
z80-memory(5), z80-banks(5)
