.TH Z80-BANKS 5 "29 Jun 2006" "Z80-BANKS Version 2.3" "Bank layout format"

.SH NAME 
description of file format used by z80-mon for bank layout

.SH DESCRIPTION
The file compounds of lines each is either a comment line or a bank- or a page
description. A comment line starts with a 
.I #
and may appear anywhere in the file.
A line containing a bank description consists of the following 4 entries: 
\fIaccess_type bank_id log2_size bank_name\fR.
A line containing a page description consists of these 4 entries: 
either
.I offset
or 
.I bank_id
followed by \fIport_no mask\fR and a non empty list of \fIbank_id\fRs.

All bank description lines must preceed the page description lines and must be
ordered ascending by their unique \fIbank_id\fR.
The following page description lines are ordered ascending by their first
item which is typically an
.I offset
or in the case of a virtuel bank a \fIbank_id\fR. If lines have the same 
first entry then they must be ordered ascending by their \fIport_id\fR with \fI-\fR
regarded less than any other port_id. And in the case even their second entries
equals each other, then these lines will be ordered by their \fImask\fR.
A list of \fIbank_id\fRs is an ascending sequence of \fIbank_id\fRs separated only by
\fI,\fR (comma), not any whitespace.

.B access_type
   is the type of the bank. Only the four types
.I +
for
   read/write memory,
.I r
for read only memory,
.I w
for write
   only memory and
.I -
for a virtuel bank are valid.

.B bank_id
   is a 2 digit hexadecimal byte value.

.B log2_size
   gives the size of the bank in bytes as its log2-value.
   Currently only banks whose
.I log2_size
equals 14 (16 kB)
   or 12 (4 kB) are supported. Due to hardware complexity
   all banks must have currently the same size!

.B bank_name
   must either indicate a readable file which contains the
   machine code for the bank or the special value
.I - (minus)
   which indicates either undefined storage, typically RAM,
   or in the case of a virtuel bank no file name. If the corres-
   sponding file is smaller than the bank size the remaining
   bytes at the end of the bank will be undefined. If the file
   size is larger than the bank size only the first bytes in
   the file will be used.

.B offset
   is a 4 digit hexadecimal value telling the hardware the
   start address the bank to be mapped on. Furthermore
   each
.I offset 
must be a multiple of 
.I 1<<log2_size
of the
   bank size it can be mapped to.

.B port_no
   is a decimal or hexadecimal number of value < 256 or
   the character - (minus). In the second case the
   following
.I mask
must be 0.

.B mask
   is a 2 digit hexadecimal byte value which covers the relevant
   part of value send to the corresponding port. The 
.I port_no
   together with the given
.I mask
must have a unique
.I offset
   respectively \fIbank_id\fR.

Each used \fIbank_id\fR in a page description must be defined in a previous
bank description.
Summarizing, this file describes how the banks are mapped to
memory or other (virtuel) banks.
If a byte value is put to a port which has a corresponding page description
then a mapping occurs if
the
.I bank_id
matches the value and-ed with the
.I mask
of the port.
Therefore page description lines with the same
.I port_no
should have different 
.I bank_id
s for a unique mapping. The default \fIbank_id\fR of a page is the one with
the lowest \fIbank_id\fR. This is selected at hardware initialisation and after
a bank reset.

.SH SEE ALSO
z80-memory(5)
