.TH Z80-ASM 1 "13 May 2005" "Z80-ASM Version 2.2" "Z80 Assembler"

.SH NAME
z80-asm \- command-line Z80 CPU assember for Unix and DO$

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B z80-asm [-wlhcf XX] inputfile[.asm] [startaddress[[:length] :outputfile] ]

.B z80-asm [-wlhcf XX] inputfile startaddress[:length]:outputfile ...

.SH DESCRIPTION
z80-asm is a two pass compiler of the Z80 CPU assembly language. It's first
argument is name of an input (source) file. If no sections follow no code is
generated.
In the case of exactly one section follows and the inputfile name ends with
.I .asm
the
.I outputfile
with its leading colon delimiter and the optional
.I length
may be omitted. Then the output is written to a file named
.I inputfilename.z80
Generally each section tells the compiler to save code to file 
.I outputfile
from address
.I start address
and with len
.I length.
Format of the file is described in
.B z80-file(5).

If an obligate
.I outputfile
is missing compilation is aborted after this section but error checking of the
code is done.
If
.I length
is ommited, compiler saves code from start address to furthest byte stored to
memory (inclusive). 
.PP
All addresses are given decimal in range from 0 to 65535 or hexadecimal in the range
from 0x0000 to 0xffff.
.PP
For assembler syntax see section
.B z80-asm(5).

.SH OPTIONS
Compiler called with no options or 
.I -h
option prints usage. Option
.I -w
turns on warning messages, when overwriting code in memory. Option
.I -l
writes a source listing in pass 2 to stdout. Each input line is prepended
by PC, generated machine code and line no of 5 digits. Option
.I -f
which must be followed by a 2 digit hexadecimal value XX sets the undefined
bytes in gaps created by DEFS and ORG statements to the given fill value XX.
Finally option
.I -c
prints a cross reference listing of the labels to stdout in case of no errors.

.SH BUGS
No bugs are known. :-) If you find some, please feel free to send me a bugreport.

.SH AUTHORS
Z80-ASM was written by Brainsoft <brain@artax.karlin.mff.cuni.cz> and Achim Flammenkamp <achim@mathematik.uni-bielefeld.de>

.SH COPYING
Copying of this software must be under terms of the GNU General Public
License. There's absolutely no warranty on this software. For more details see
file
.B doc/COPY

.PP
(c) 1999-2004 Brainsoft

.SH SEE ALSO
z80-asm(5), z80-mon(1), z80-file(5)
