.TH Z80-MON 1 "01 Oct 2006" "Z80-MON Version 2.4" "Z80 Monitor"

.SH NAME
z80-mon \- an interactive Z80 monitor with disassembler and emulator for UNIX,
Linux and DO$

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B z80-mon [-h] [-E] [-R path] [filename[:startaddress] ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I z80-mon
simulates the Z80 CPU on instruction level. It is attached with
64 KB memory, where data and instructions are stored. With the bank switching
feature it even can access more memory.

The monitor displays in the upper left content of memory,
lower left the list of instructions in front of PC, followed by the stack.
In the right half it shows in the first line the flags and status of IFF and IM.
Below follows the content of all registers together with the value of the tick
counter. The last but one line is reserved for the (up to 8) breakpoints and
finally in the last line either monitor error messages or the current status
of the monitor is displayed (FOLLOW-toggle RUN-status CPU-speed PROTO-status
KEYBOARD-toggle).
Using
.I z80-mon
you can trace your program (and even protocol this), change
content of registers and memory, change the program, save it, load others e.t.c. 
It even supports bank switching via the file
.I banks.


Content of registers is displayed in binary, hexadecimal and decimal scale.
All addresses are displayed in hexadecimal scale.

The
.I z80-mon
executes instructions exactly as the Z80 CPU. Instructions for
input/output (
.I in, out, ini, ind, inir, indr, outi, outd, otir, otdr
) can be used to communicate with the outer-world via file descriptors.

The
.I Halt 
instruction tests if the interrupt is disabled. If yes it makes an error
message and put CPU into wait, otherwise it keeps running. The Halt-pin
active symbol is displayed in both cases in the upper right corner of the
monitor.
If you press the R key, flag 
.I RUN
is turned off.

Interrupt handling and bank switching is still experimental. Use signals under
UNIX/Linux or certain key strokes to generate interrupts.

On default
.I z80-mon
controls a Z80-cpu (with a build in oscillator) and at least 64 KB memory
including bank switching hardware;
but further hardware may be attached.
.I hardware.
Currently there is an external
.I quartz
,needed for synchronisation of several components, a
.I daisy-chain
IO-curcuit, needed for interrupt handling of several components and an (experimental)
.I Z80-ctc
availible.

.SH ARGUMENTS
If a couple
.I filename:address
is supplied, file
.I filename
is loaded to virtual Z80 memory from address
.I address.
If file contents
exceeds address 65535, it will be clipped. Any number of files can be loaded.
Files are loaded sequentially, later file overwrites previous memory content.

.SH OPTIONS
The monitor called with a  
.I -h
option prints usage and exits. The option
.I -E
forces emulator mode. This means, after loading an optional Z80 executable
the CPU gets a reset and starts immediately execution. Moreover keyboard
input is disabled.
The option
.I -B
must be followed by a 
.B filename
containing a bank description and
.I -R
must be followed by a 
.B path
pointing to an accessable directory which contains the binaery bank files.
If omitted, the current working directory is used.

.SH KEYS
.B ? or h - help
  Shows the key help screen.

.B Q -quit
  Ends the program. Memory content will be discarded.

.B * - clear
  clears all CPU registers, resets banks (if bank
  switching was used) and finally resets the CPU.

.B @ - reset
  resets the CPU (pin RES high for at least 3 clock
  cycles)

.B # - zero
  fills whole memory with zeros

.B $ - null
  set the tick (clock cycle) counter to zero

.B & - stop
  set stack pointer
.I SP
to 0xFFFC and store at this address
  the value 0xFFFE followed by the 2 bytes for DI, HALT.
  This serves as a fall back trap for the final RET.

.B % - breakpoint
  set a breakpoint at memory dump address together with
  a run counter. In run-mode this counter will be
  decreased if positive each time its address is reached.
  If it becomes 0 the CPU is immediately stopped.

.B L - load
  Loads file to memory. After pressing this key, you'll
  be asked about filename. For abort press escape.

.B S - save
  Saves memory from current address (in program 
  counter), first enter filename then length.
  Escape aborts saving.

.B Backspace - execute current instruction
  Executes instruction pointed by the program counter.

.B """ - set protocol file
  After pressing this key, you'll be asked about 
  filename. For abort press escape. Else it opens the file
  for append and protocols each executed instruction
  together with the current CPU register values. Sets the
  PROTO switch. To disable the protocol mode select a new
  protocol file with empty file name.

.B r - run
  Toggle start/stop executing instructions. Effectively
  toggles the WAIT-pin of the CPU. :) Also, the following
  keys activate WAIT-pin:
.I @ s p =

.B R - toggle run
  this stops a running CPU if it is catched in a HALT
  and IFF0=1 (if monitor keyboard read is enabled).

.B Space - skip instruction
  Moves to the next instruction.

.B D - disassemble
  Disassemble memory from current address (in program 
  counter), first enter filename then length.
  Escape aborts disassembling and saving.

.B x - execute instruction
  Asks about instruction and executes it. Except jump,
  call and return instructions, the 
.I PC
is not changed.

.B Enter - put instruction
  Asks about instruction and puts it on address in
.I PC.
  When you press the key, a prompt appears.

.B . - put instruction
  Asks about instruction and puts it at address of
  the memory dump. When you press the key, a prompt
  appears.

.B u - defm
  Puts string to memory starting at address of the 
  memory dump. When you press the key, a prompt appears.
  Enter comma or whitespace separated list of strings.

.B v - defb
  Same as
.I u
, but instead of strings you must enter bytes.
  Accepted numbers are described in
.B z80-asm(5)

.B w - defw
  Same as
.I b
, but instead of bytes 16-bit numbers will be
  stored.

.B p - set PC
  After pressing this key you can enter new value of the
  program counter. Numbers are by default in decimal 
  scale. For hexadecimal scale you must write prefix
.I 0x
  first. Octal numbers are accepted too but with prefix
.I 0.

.B s - set SP
  Same as
.I p
, but changes stack pointer.

.B m - set memory dump address
  Same as
.I s
or
.I p
but affects start of the memory dump.

.B + - increase clock speed
  Depending on the clock speed, memory dump, stack and
  instruction list may not be refreshed. At higher
  frequencies only the
.I tick counter
  ,
.I PC, SP
and the
.I Halt-pin
status are refreshed.

.B - - decrease clock speed

.B Tab - toggle FOLLOW
  Toggles the FOLLOW switch. When the FOLLOW switch is on,
  memory dump starts automatically at address in the
  program counter.

.B t - toggle disassembling of constants
  Cyclic switches the constant representation base:
  mixed(default), each decimal, each hexadecimal, each
  hexadecimal with prexfix 0x.

.B j - toggle disassembling of addresses
  Cyclic switches JR/DJNZ instructions between relative
  and absolute, or switches all JR/DJNZ/CALL/JP and LD
  memory accesses (....) into K-prefixed labels or guess
  even LD 16-bit constants as labels. In the last two
  cases a K-prefixed label resp. a V-prefixed label will
  be generated. Also here we have a two-pass disassembler.

.B ^ - toggle EI/DI
  Toggles enable/disable interrupt.

.B i - change IM
  Cyclic switches the interrupt mode. Values are 0, 1, 2.

.B Esc - generates nonmaskable interrupt
  generates a nonmaskable interrupt (pin NMI of CPU high).

.B ! - toggle keyboard read
  disables monitor read from keyboard if CPU is running
  (dangerous!). CPU will only stop if running into HALT
  and interrupts are disabled.

.B = - set CPU registers
  promtes for a name of an 8-bit register (A,B,C,D,E,F,
  H,L,I,A or A',B',C',D',E',F',H') or a 16-bit register
  (type
.I =
again).

.SH SIGNALS
Most process signals (not system signals SIGKILL, SIGSTOP, SIGCONT)
are mapped to maskable interrupts. There are six exceptions:
.I SIGTERM
and
.I SIGHUP
will terminate z80-mon,
.I SIGABRT
will set the monitor in interactive dissamble mode (stops running CPU),
.I SIGUSR1
will cause a reset and
.I SIGUSR2
will cause a NMI. Lastly
.I SIGTRAP
will force the CPU immediately to dump its state into the file
.I .CPU.
This enables online monitoring of the running CPU.

.SH FILES
 ./.CPU
 ./.Z80_ports
 ./keyboard_map

The file 
.I .Z80_ports
is used as buffer for the IO-port addresses, if hardware IO-buffering is enabled. The file
.I keyboard_map
is used to remap key binding for the IN instruction accessing the stdin port.

.SH BUGS
Interrupt mode 0 isn't working. If you find some bugs, please feel free to send me a bugreport.

.SH AUTHORS
Z80-MON was written by Brainsoft <brain@artax.karlin.mff.cuni.cz> and
Achim Flammenkamp <achim@mathematik.uni-bielefeld.de>

.SH COPYING
Copying of this software must be under terms of the GNU General Public
License. There's absolutely no warranty on this software. For more details see
file
.B doc/COPY

.PP
(c) 1999-2004 Brainsoft

.SH SEE ALSO
z80-asm(1), z80-asm(5), z80-file(5), z80-ports(5), z80-banks(5)
