.TH Z80-CPU 3 "03 Jun 2005" "Z80-CPU Version 2.3" "Z80 CPU layout"

.SH NAME
F, A, B, C, D, E, H, L, F_, A_, B_, C_, D_, E_, H_, L_,
IXl, IXh, IYl, IYh, IX, IY, SP, PC, 
I, R, IM
DATA, ADDRESS,
IFF0, IFF1,IFF2, IFF3,
cpu_rd, cpu_wr, cpu_iorq, cpu_mreq, cpu_m1, cpu_halts, cpu_wait, cpu_int, cpu_reset, cpu_busrq, cpu_busack
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "#include <z80-global>"
.sp 2
.BI "unsigned char F, A, B, C, D, E, H, L;"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char F_, A_, B_, C_, D_, E_, H_, L_;"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char IXl, IXh, IYl, IYh;"
.sp
.BI "unsigned short  IX, IY, SP, PC;"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char I, R, IM;"
.sp
.BI "unsigned char DATA;"
.sp
.BI "unsigned short ADDRESS;"
.sp
.BI "bit  IFF0, IFF1,IFF2, IFF3;"
.sp
.BI "bit cpu_rd, cpu_wr, cpu_iorq, cpu_mreq, cpu_m1, cpu_halts,"
.BI "    cpu_wait, cpu_int, cpu_reset, cpu_busrq, cpu_busack"
.sp
.BI "unsigned long ticks;"
.sp

.SH DESCRIPTION
These variables allow direct CPU manipulation.
.PP
.I F
indicates the F-register.
.PP
.I A, B, C, D, E, H, L
indicate the general purpose 8bit registers.
.PP
.I F_
indicates the F'-register.
.PP
.I A_, B_, C_, D_, E_, H_, L_
indicate the 2nd bank general purpose 8bit registers.
.PP
.I IXl, IXh, IYl, IYh
indicate the 8bit registers made up the index registers.
.PP
.I IX, IY
indicate the two 16bit index registers.
.PP
.I SP
indicates the 16bit stack pointer register.
.PP
.I PC
indicates the 16bit program counter register.
.PP
.I I
indicates the 8bit interrupt register.
.PP
.I R
indicates the 8bit refresh register.
.PP
.I IM
indicates the 2bit interrupt mode.
.PP
.I IFF0
indicates the internal EI-flipflop.
.PP
.I IFF1, IFF2
indicate the internal interrupt flipflops.
.PP
.I IFF3
indicates the internal edge-triggred interrupt NMI-flipflop.
.PP
.I DATA
indicates the 8 CPU-DATA pins.
.PP
.I ADDR
indicates the 16 CPU-ADDRESS pins.
.PP
The following 5 pins represent the system control bus:
.PP
.I cpu_rd
indicates the CPU-READ pin.
.PP
.I cpu_wr
indicates the CPU-WRITE pin.
.PP
.I cpu_iorq
indicates the CPU-IO_REQUEST pin.
.PP
.I cpu_mreq
indicates the CPU-MEMORY_REQUEST pin.
.PP
.I cpu_m1
indicates the CPU-MACHINE-CYCLE-1 pin.
.PP
.I cpu_halts
indicates the CPU-HALT pin.
.PP
.I cpu_wait
indicates the CPU-WAIT pin.
.PP
.I cpu_int
indicates the CPU-INTERRUPT pin.
.PP
.I cpu_reset
indicates the CPU-RESET pin.
.PP
.I cpu_busrq
indicates the CPU-BUS_RQ pin.
.PP
.I cpu_busack
indicates the CPU-BUS_ACK pin.
.PP
.SH FILES
 .CPU is a binary file which contains at least 32 byte coding the current CPU status.
.SH SEE ALSO
z80-memory(3), z80-mon(1)
